#OrientDB introduction

= OrientDB DBMS =

OrientDB DBMS - это СУБД c открытым программным кодом (лицензия Open Source Apache 2), реализующая модель Not Only SQL.
Общими чертами нереляционных СУБД (NoSQL) и их преимуществами над реляционными являются:
 * простой интерфейс/протокол доступа,
 * хорошая горизонтальная масштабируемость и пропускная способность, 
 * эффективное использование распределенных индексов и RAM для хранения данных,
 * возможность динамического определения различных атрибутов и схемы данных.

== Введение ==

OrientDB относится к классу *документо-ориентированных (Documet Store/Document based/Document oriented) СУБД NoSQL*. Документо-ориентированные СУБД хранят коллекции пар ключ/значение, а внутри них рекурсивно коллекции коллекций. Как правило, для представления таких "документов" используются JSON-подобные (см. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON), или XML-подобные структуры. В частности, OrientDB использует JSON и XML в оригинальном виде.

Но в документо-ориентированных хранилищах как правило не используется оператор SQL JOIN (все JOIN'ы, если необходимо, придется реализовывать на уровне приложения), в основном применяется масштабирование по горизонтали.

В документо-ориентированные БД очень просто осуществить перенос данных из объектно-ориентированного программного обеспечения.

_Rem 1. CouchDB, MongoDB, SimpleDB так же являются документо-ориентированными._ 

_Rem 2. Для обработки связей OrientDB имплементирует особенности графовых хранилищ (GraphDB)_

OrientDB написана на Java, что обеспечивает *кроссплатформенность*.

Позволяет извлекать в графы из сотен связанных объектов быстрее, чем за 1мс, в отличие от реляционных СУБД, использующих дорогостоящие JOIN'ы.

== Архитектура ==

OrientDB is a document DBMS. On top of it has been built the Orient Key-Value Server and the Orient Object Database.

The ODatabase class provides the main APIs an application uses. ODatabase communicates with a OStorage class implementation that stores physically the records.

It's the real physical database. There are three OStorage implementations:

 * Local, that write and read records on the local file system (the access is made in the same process)
 * Remote, that acts as a proxy and send and receive all the requests to a remote OrientDB Server instance
 * Memory, all data remain in memory without to use the file system at all

A Storage is composed by multiple Clusters and Data Segments. You can move real files in your file system only by using the Orient APIs to avoid data corruption.

*Cluster* is very generic way to group records and it's a concept that not exists in the Relational world. You can use a cluster to group all the record of a certain type, or by a specific values.

If you've the background of Relational DBMS world you can start to think to a cluster like a table and use it to group all the records by types.

A cluster can be local or logical.

== CAP ==

Large distributed systems run into a problem which smaller systems don’t usually have to worry about. “Brewers CAP Theorem” defines this problem in a very simple way. It states, that though its desirable to have Consistency, High-Availability and Partition-tolerance in every system, unfortunately no system can achieve all three at the same time.

Following the CAP theorem OrientDB supports *CA*.

=== Consistency ===

All nodes see the same data at the same time.

"A fully Consistent system is one where the system can guarantee that once you store a state (lets say “x=y”) in the system, it will report the same state in every subsequent operation until the imagestate is explicitly changed by something outside the system."

=== Availability ===

Node failures do not prevent survivors from continuing to operate.

=== Partition-tolerance ===

The system continues to operate despite arbitrary message loss.

*CAP model matrix*

|| Usage || (C)onsistency || (A)vailability || (P)artition-tolerance ||
|| Local database || Yes || No || No ||
|| Remote database	|| Yes || No || No ||
|| Remote clustered database || Yes || Yes || No ||
|| Key/Value server || No || Yes || Yes ||

=== Disk-write strategies ===

Orient, by default, is configured for synchronous writes but depending by the OS file system management changes can be permanents only after the OS flushes the buffer into the disk. If you're using a transaction you're protect in case any crash happens when data are not written to the disk yet.

For this reason Orient permits to change this policy.

*Synchronize all changes to the disk when any single-record is changed*

Bye default is false.

*Synchronize all changes to the disk when a transaction is committed*

Bye default is true.

== Репликация ==

 * Master-Slaves type, where it can be only one Master and N Slaves. If the Master crashes a Slave is elected to be the new Master
 * IP multicast to discover cluster nodes
 * Configuration of nodes using TCP/IP, useful for Clouds that don't allow the IP multicast
 * Two sync modes: full where all the database is compressed and sent over the network, and partial by sending only the changes happened since the last sync
 * New database handled by the Master OrientDB Server instance to store all the pending records until a configurable threshold. Up this threshold the logs are deleted and the node need a full-sync on startup
 * New console commands to display nodes, listen clustering messages and elect the master manually

== SQL ==

Althought OrientDB is a NoSQL dbms, it supports SQL as language to execute queries and commands. The choice was made for the main reason that developers already know SQL and they feel more comfortable if start to use something familiar.

Many SQL commands share the WHERE conditions. OrientDB ignore the case when parses.

== Интерфейсы доступа (APIs) ==

=== RESTful HTTP ===
OrientDB RESTful HTTP протокол позволяет обращаться к OrientDB серверу по HTTP протоколу.

OrientDB RESTful HTTP протокол использует 4 метода протокола HTTP:
 # GET - извлечение данных из базы,
 # POST - вставка данных в базу,
 # PUT - изменение данных в базе (update),
 # DELETE - удаление данных из базы.

Результаты - в формате JSON.

=== Java API ===
Для передачи данных между приложением и сервером OrientDB используется улучшенный протокол двоичной синхронной передачи данных для повышения производительности.

Доступ к БД реализован через Java API (c поддержкой схемы данных (full-schema mode)) или просто через  ODatabaseDocumentPool (без схемы (less-schema mode)).



= Источники =
 # http://nosql-database.org/ 
 # http://www.slideshare.net/lvca/orient-db-introduction 
 # http://www.orientechnologies.com/orient-db.htm
 # http://blog.nahurst.com/visual-guide-to-nosql-systems
 # http://blogerator.ru/page/nosql-vvedenie-v-teoriju-bd